---
topic: 'building a website'
description: 'building a website one day at a time'
---

# Day 1

## Create the Rust package

Start by using Cargo to create a new package and changing into the directory:

```Shell
$ cargo new build-a-website
$ cd build-a-website
```

Inside the project directory, add Actix Web to the the project dependencies `Cargo.toml` file:

```TOML
[dependencies]
actix-web = "4"
```

To test, run the package and check it builds:

```shell
$ cargo run
Hello, world!
```
## Create a request handler module

Create a file for a module that will contain request handlers in the package `src` directory:

```
src
├── main.rs
└── handlers.rs
```

In the handlers module create an asynchronous request handler function that returns an Actix Web `HttpResponse` struct. A request handler must return a type that can be converted into an -`HttpResponse`, that is, it must implement the Actix Web `Responder` trait. Annotate this function with the Actix Web `get` attribute macro. Set the body of the HTTP Message with the `HttpResponse` `body` method.

```Rust
use actix_web::{get, HttpResponse};

#[get("/")]
async fn hello() -> HttpResponse {
    HttpResponse::Ok().body("Hello World")
}
```

Remember to declare the handlers module in `src/main.rs`.
## Set up the web server

In the `src/main.rs` file, add the `#[actix_web::main]` annotation to the `main` function and change the function to run asynchronously with the `async fn` syntax. Add a return type of `std::io::Result<()>`.

To create the server we use the Actix Web `HttpServer` type and `App` instance. Change the body of the `main` function to the following so that `src/main.rs` should look like this:

```Rust
mod handlers;

use actix_web::{App, HttpServer};
use handlers::hello;

#[actix_web::main]
async fn main() -> std::io::Result<()> {
    HttpServer::new(|| App::new().service(hello))
        .bind(("127.0.0.1", 8080))?
        .run()
        .await
}
```

The `App` `service` method is used to register request handlers with the `App` instance.

Test the program with the `Cargo Run` command and navigate to `http://127.0.0.1:8080/` in a web browser.

## Set up version control

From the package directory in the terminal, initialise a new git repository, add the files and make the first commit.

```Shell
$ git init
$ git add .
$ git commit -m "first commit"
```

If the GitHub command line tool is installed, use the following command to create a new remote repository from the local repository and push the first commit.

```
$ gh repo create --public --source=. --push
```